*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 64526 ***

                     HUMOROUS MASTERPIECES, NO. 2

                          PICTURES BY GAVARNI

                  CARSON & NICOL, PRINTERS, GLASGOW.

    [Heading: THE DECEITFULNESS OF WOMEN IN MATTERS OF SENTIMENT.]

 [Illustration: “Henri is very nice ... but I believe it is Charles I
                              love best.”

                         “Then marry Henri.”]




                               PICTURES
                                  BY
                                GAVARNI


                          GOWANS & GRAY, LTD.
                   35 LEICESTER SQUARE, LONDON, W.C.
                      58 CADOGAN STREET, GLASGOW
                                 1906


                _The following pictures are selected
                from the two volumes of Gavarni’s
                “Œuvres Choisies” published by Hetzel,
                Paris, 1846-8. In choosing them the
                publishers have been careful to exclude any
                illustrations likely to
                offend English taste
                or too local in interest for the allusions
                to be generally intelligible._



[Heading: THE DECEITFULNESS OF WOMEN IN MATTERS OF SENTIMENT]

[Illustration: “How did you know, papa, that I loved Mr. Leon?”

“Because you always told me about Mr. Paul.”]

[Illustration: THE DECEITFULNESS OF WOMEN IN MATTERS OF SENTIMENT

     My Dear Amédée,

     This evening, about eight o’clock, at the Boule Rouge, dressed as a
     citizeness; be on the lookout, do not keep me waiting,
                                                  Your Clara.



     My Beloved Henri,

     Judge of my despair! I have a frightful sore throat, it will be
     quite impossible for me to go out this evening. In fact, they are
     thinking of applying twenty leeches!!! Pity much and love always
     your


                                                  Clara.]

[Heading: THE DECEITFULNESS OF WOMEN IN MATTERS OF SENTIMENT]

[Illustration: _To the first gentleman._--“Meet me this evening, from
four to five o’clock, quai de l’Horloge du Palais.--Your Augustine.”

_To the second gentleman._--“This evening, quai des Lunettes, between
four and five o’clock.--Your Augustine.”

_To the third gentleman._--“Quai des Morfondus, this evening, from four
o’clock to five.--Your Augustine.”

_To a fourth gentleman._--“I expect you this evening at four
o’clock.--Your own Augustine.”]

[Heading: THE DECEITFULNESS OF WOMEN IN MATTERS OF SENTIMENT]

[Illustration: “_You_ frank! _you_ innocent! have confidence in
_you_!... _you_!... why! you would blow your nose with your left hand
only for the pleasure of deceiving your right hand if you could!”]

[Heading: THE DECEITFULNESS OF WOMEN IN MATTERS OF SENTIMENT]

[Illustration: “O, Henri! Henri! Mon Dieu, Mon Dieu!... To sacrifice
oneself for so ungrateful a wretch!... Never see him again!... Never!...
But will it ever be possible for me not to see my Henri again?...”

“Fortunately you have still got your Amédée.”]

[Heading: THE DECEITFULNESS OF WOMEN IN MATTERS OF SENTIMENT]

[Illustration: “What woman is there that would not be happy and proud to
belong to you, my Jules?”]

[Heading: THE DECEITFULNESS OF WOMEN IN MATTERS OF SENTIMENT]

[Illustration: “Wretched woman! you will be the shame of your own sex
and the despair of mine!”]

[Heading: CLICHY]

[Illustration: “Don’t make any payment to account! I tell you, the
creditor who is not paid is only a creditor; the creditor who is paid is
a tiger!”]

[Heading: CLICHY]

[Illustration: “Why, old man, this is Sunday.”

“What does that matter to you?”

“Why! (on Sundays, one does not care a rap for the bailiff) it matters
this much, that I could go for a walk if I could get out.”]

[Heading: CLICHY]

[Illustration: “But how did you let yourself be caught like that?”

“Ask the wild ducks how they get caught!... He drew on me on March 1st,
and I was arrested on April 5th: that’s how it happened.”]

[Heading: CLICHY]

[Illustration: “You see, grief does not make me thin! and I will give a
piece of advice to my creditors, in their own interest; if they want to
take me out of here, they had better make haste, for they will soon not
be able to get me through the door.”]

[Heading: PARIS BY NIGHT]

[Illustration: “Do you see that swell coming in there?”

“Yes!”

“Do you know who he is?”

“Who?”

“Nobody at all.”]

[Heading: PARIS BY NIGHT]

[Illustration: Two suspicions.]

[Heading: PARIS BY NIGHT]

[Illustration: “Count Onnesaitki!...”

“Baron Gros-Jean!...”]

[Heading: PARIS BY NIGHT]

[Illustration: “I was begging yesterday at the church doors: I got
nothing.”

“I begged at the dancing halls: I did not badly.”]

[Heading: PARIS BY NIGHT]

[Illustration: “Here’s a fine old chap, who is going to give us
something to drink his health!... if he’s a good sort!... eh, old
boy?”]

[Heading: PARIS BY NIGHT]

[Illustration: Not much here!]

[Heading: TERRIBLE CHILDREN]

[Illustration: “I’ve brought sweets for you, little chap; I’ll give you
them when I go away.”

“Then give me them now and then go away.”]

[Heading: TERRIBLE CHILDREN]

[Illustration: “Mamma, it’s Mr.... you know, the gentleman with the
nose....”]

[Heading: TERRIBLE CHILDREN]

[Illustration: “I’ll tell!... you’ve taken some more of the rouge mamma
puts on, out of the little pot.”]

[Heading: TERRIBLE CHILDREN]

[Illustration: “The rose you gave mamma?... Oh, yes, yes!... that you
nearly broke your neck to get?... Why, cousin Anatole put it on
Jacobin’s tail, Matthieu’s donkey.... Mamma _did_ laugh!... Have you any
more nuts?”]

[Heading: TERRIBLE CHILDREN]

[Illustration: “I have seen cousin enough, mamma, are you coming
home.”]

[Heading: TERRIBLE CHILDREN]

[Illustration: “Oh! it is true! you have eyes like the lamps on your
cab.... Well, Clémence was perfectly right, she was.”]

[Heading: TERRIBLE CHILDREN]

[Illustration: “You don’t know your lesson, your aunt will come and you
will be scolded!...”

“Oh, yes, aunt ... she is with the fat hair-woman.... You don’t know how
long it takes to remove the stuff they put in aunt’s hair to make it
black afterwards.”]

[Heading: TERRIBLE CHILDREN]

[Illustration: “Adieu, madam, I shall call again soon, since you permit
me to come to bore you like this sometimes.”

“Oh! you never bore me.”

“Yes, mamma, you said the other day he was a bore.”

“It is not true!... Mamma, George is telling lies again!... Mamma said
he was stupid and a bore!... Now!”]

[Heading: LORETTES]

[Illustration: “I am keeping a ticket for you, my dear Charles, for
Chantereine; I am playing the ‘Maid of Honour.’”

“That will be funny!”

“ ...All my friends are coming.”

“The place will be full.”]

[Heading: ACTRESSES]

[Illustration: AT HER LEVEE

_1st Criticism._--“It is impossible to exhibit more wit, more gaiety,
more cleverness than does Madame Polydor in the part of Suzette; it is
impossible to be more refined and elegant.”

_2nd Criticism._--“Decidedly, Madame Polydor shows herself more
insignificant than ever in the part of Suzette.”

_3rd Criticism._--“Etc., etc., etc., etc.”]

[Heading: ACTRESSES]

[Illustration: THE PART

“See: the waves of the inhuman sea have left nothing for us on the sand.
The blighting wind of the desert has passed over the traveller’s tree,
and its branch, alas! is withered.... Alas! my eyes have sought in vain
the life-giving seeds in the odorous grass that the tempest has
levelled, and in the abandoned nests of the young birds of the shore!...
O, mother!... mother!... I hunger!”

“Well, here is your coffee, Titine.”]

[Heading: ACTRESSES]

[Illustration: STUDYING

“At last, then, you have come, oh monster, soiled with crime!”]

[Heading: ACTRESSES]

[Illustration: “Oh, Lord! protect a Christian virgin.”]

[Heading: ACTRESSES]

[Illustration: “We sup at Véry’s, Chozikof and I, with Mlle.
Beaupertuis.... Will you come, my charmer?”

“Your proposal, Count, is of a nature likely to compromise gravely the
interests of our faithful ally, England.... Nevertheless we shall
consider it; but, whatever we resolve, we shall keep it secret from
Russia; we give you, Count, our royal word.”]

[Heading: ACTRESSES]

[Illustration: “Madame Charmant, you spoke the pavilion scene like an
angel: it is perfect! but do not mount the stairs so quickly; you must
leave Sir Arthur time to kill himself.”]

[Heading: PARIS BY MORNING]

[Illustration: “Does Madame de Saint-Aiglemont live here, madam, if you
please?”

“Yes ... M’ame Chiffet!... you’re wanted.”]

[Heading: PARIS BY MORNING]

[Illustration: “Blow!”]

[Heading: PARIS BY MORNING]

[Illustration: “Come on! come on! will you ever have the yard swept this
morning.... It is eight o’clock already!... and you have the middle
flat’s boots to do yet and your piano to study....”]

[Heading: PARIS BY MORNING]

[Illustration: “Why deprive oneself of the superfluous, when one can
dispense with the necessary? With what a housekeeper costs, one has two
stalls at the opera.”]

[Heading: THE STUDENTS OF PARIS]

[Illustration: “Adieu, my good fellow, I leave you my pipe and my
wife.... You will take great care of my pipe!...”]

[Heading: THE STUDENTS OF PARIS]

[Illustration: ARTICLE 212 OF THE CIVIL CODE

“Husband and wife owe one another fidelity, succour, assistance.”]

[Heading: THE STUDENTS OF PARIS]

[Illustration: “How much?”

“Guess....”

“Thirty francs?”

“Four francs!”

“Good heavens!”]

[Heading: THE STUDENTS OF PARIS]

[Illustration: “It is I!” “It is I!” “She is making eyes at me.” “She is
winking at me.” “You are mistaken, my boy.” “You are wrong, old man.”
Both together, “Stop, stop, stop, we are both right ... she squints!”]

[Heading: THE STUDENTS OF PARIS]

[Illustration: “And on Sunday, what do you do, my boy?”

“On Sunday, cousin, we walk in a garden called the Grande-Chaumière,
where we hear sacred music.”

“After church?”

“After church, cousin....”]

[Heading: THE STUDENTS OF PARIS]

[Illustration: “Ah, my dear fellow, don’t pity yourself! You will be
doctor, I shall be a royal attorney: while you will be obliged to have
talent, I will be compelled to have manners.”

“_That_ will be hard!”]

[Heading: THE STUDENTS OF PARIS]

[Illustration: Studying Law.]

[Heading: THE STUDENTS OF PARIS]

[Illustration: “Confound it, nephew, it is good to be a hard worker, but
one cannot always work, so, in the country, one amuses oneself: do like
me.”]

[Heading: THE YOUNG MAN’S LIFE]

[Illustration: “You haven’t given me the fifty francs you have been
owing me for six months, you rascal!”

“Very well, godfather, that will stand for the interest on the three
hundred you have given me.”

“How that?”

“Because it is fifteen days since I asked for them. Godfather, one ought
to be exact!”]

[Heading: THE YOUNG MAN’S LIFE]

[Illustration: “When people say you have a wife, that means a wife has
you.”]

[Heading: THE YOUNG MAN’S LIFE]

[Illustration: “How much does a suit like that cost?”

“I don’t know.”

“Heaven grant, my dear fellow, that you may never know.”]

[Heading: THE YOUNG MAN’S LIFE]

[Illustration: “I wanted to tell you, uncle, ... that....”

“I know! don’t trouble: I have no money.”]

[Heading: THE YOUNG MAN’S LIFE]

[Illustration: One has often need of a smaller than oneself.]

[Heading: THE YOUNG MAN’S LIFE]

[Illustration: “Now you’re done for!... My dear fellow, your idiot of a
groom has mistaken the bouquet: your letter for the niece has gone to
the aunt.”

“Oh, the deuce!!! After all, what does it matter? Now that I think of
it, I like the aunt better.”]

[Heading: THE YOUNG MAN’S LIFE]

[Illustration: “You must make up your mind, let’s see!... marry Claire,
with the Forest of Nangie, or take Clémence, you will have The Mills!...
Do you wish the forest or the mills?” “Ah, godfather, I would like....”
“The forest and the mills?” “Godfather, I would like Félicie, who has
neither forest nor mills....” “You are a fool, godson.” “I am in love,
godfather.” “You are a fool, godson.”]

[Heading: THE YOUNG MAN’S LIFE]

[Illustration: “Do you pay much at your hotel?”

“A terrible lot: I don’t pay.”]

[Heading: THE YOUNG MAN’S LIFE]

[Illustration: FUNERAL ORATION.

“Ah! her woman’s nature was a rich one! pretty, all heart! full of wit
... and so good!”

“Yes, that is true!... However, ... there are others.”]

[Heading: THE YOUNG MAN’S LIFE]

[Illustration: “But at your age, rascal! I did not know what debts
were....”

“Just what I was saying this morning, uncle, to my nephew, when I gave
him fifteen sous: that scamp ruins me.”]

[Heading: THE YOUNG MAN’S LIFE]

[Illustration: “Let’s see! if it is heads, I love Clara; if it is tails,
I love Augustine.”]

[Heading: LES DÉBARDEURS]

[Illustration: “That’s no business of yours, what are you interfering
with? is her husband not there to thrash her?...”]

[Heading: LES DÉBARDEURS]

[Illustration: “What a lot of women there are! what a lot!... And when
you think that all these people eat every day God makes! It gives you a
queer idea of man!”]

[Heading: LES DÉBARDEURS]

[Illustration: “You are here, are you! that’s the way you have a
headache?”

“That’s how you attend drill, is it?”]

[Heading: LES DÉBARDEURS]

[Illustration: “And your wife?”

“She’s in the lock-up.... But I’ve lost my hat ... _that’s_ a
catastrophe!”]

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 64526 ***
